---
layout: abstract

title: "The Evolution of Byzantine and Post Byzantine Wall Paintings
       in Zakynthos (Ionian Islands). Influences of Cretan School and
       Italian Renaissance"

author: "A. Panagopoulou<sup>†</sup>, T. Tsirigotis<sup>‡</sup>,
        D. Zafiropoulos<sup>‡</sup><br>"

institution: "<sup>†</sup>University of Leiden, National Centre of
             Scientific Research “Demokritos”;
             <sup>‡</sup>Technological Educational Institute of the
             Ionian Islands"

keywords: "Wall Paintings, Zakynthos, Byzantine Period, Post Byzantine
          Period, Cretan School, Italian Renaissance"
---

In the period from the 11th to the 18th centuries, the art of wall
paintings are in remarkable and important works in the island of
Zakynthos. Great names of hagiographers worked in the churches of
Zakynthos, which before the catastrophic earthquake of 1953. The
artistic treasures that exist today prove the glorious past of the
place, but also the deeply rooted in the hearts of the Zakynthian
religious feeling. The small but large historical island followed
Byzantine, post-Byzantine hagiography, accepted the influence of the
Cretan school. In addition, the island accepted the western influences
due to its geographic location and the long period of Venetian
domination, and as a result the ‘Ionian School of art’ was formed.

In the 15th century, a unique style of religious painting known as the
Cretan School gradually emerged, determining the post-Byzantine
Orthodox art as a synthesis of the Byzantine tradition with the
Italian Renaissance and later Baroque. In a similar historical
context, the wall paintings evolved in the Ionian Islands. The spirit
of Cretan artists in Zakynthos facilitated the creation of suitable
conditions for the boom of an autonomous artistic style, with a strong
acceptance of Italian models, of the late 17th and especially the 18th
century. In the early 18th century in the Ionian Islands and
specifically in Zakynthos the conditions were already mature to adopt
the Italian style of late Renaissance and Baroque art in religious
paintings. Finally, during the 19th century, which was marked by major
political upheavals, a high level of civilization in all fields of art
and literature flourished in the Ionian islands and especially to
Zakynthos. In the midst of the 20th century (1953) a large earthquake
destroyed many of the island’s monuments. The few ones which survived
the destruction are in a very bad state of preservation with no road
access even today.

The ecclesiastical wall paintings of Zakynthos are unique in the
history of the modern Greek culture and it is imperative to be studied
in depth.
