---
layout: abstract

title: "White Pigments Used for Inlay and Painting on Pottery Dated to
       the VI-IV Mill BC (Archaeometric Study)"

author: "Angelina Pirovska"

institution: "Sofia University “St.Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "White Pigment, Inlay, Pottery, XRD, Balkans, VI-IV Mill BC"
---

During prehistory, on the Balkans various pigments have been used for
decoration of ceramics - white, yellow, red, brown, black. During the
long period of its use (VI - I mill BC), only the white pigment
undergoes development in the technology of decoration. At the
beginning of the Neolithic age, on the Balkan Peninsula, it appears as
the prime coloring agent for decorative applications on ceramics. A
paint (homogenized thick or diluted solution) was used, which was
applied with an instrument over a flattened, smoothed or polished
surface, probably before the baking of the vessel. Gradually, close to
the end of the epoch, a radically different technique of decoration
appears, white paste was inlaid on the outer or inner surface of the
vessels. The pigment comprises of materials with different consistency
(a paste of components with a variety of gauges), which implies
another way of fixing and applying it, most probably after the baking,
thus indicating a completely new technology. Incrusted decoration
persist up to the beginning of the Early Iron age, whereas the
painting with white coloring agent disappears much earlier, at the
beginning of the Chalcolite.

The archeometric analysis of white pigment, used for decoration of the
ceramics from all over Europe, presents a great variety in the mineral
composition: anatase, talc, kaolin, apatite or hydroxylapatite,
calcium oxide, calcium carbonate, dolomite. These raw materials have a
different base composition and structure, leading to different
properties. Whether the raw material, the composition of the white
pigment or only the way of preparation depending on the way of
decoration (paint or inlay) has changed, is a question that can be
answered through archeometric investigations.  In this paper, we focus
on the archaeometric characterisation of pigments used for different
kind of decoration on pottery – incrustation or painting. The
fragments are from different archaeological sites located in Western,
Central and Eastern Bulgaria, dated to a long period of time - VI-IV
millennium BC (Neolithic and Chalcolithic period). We made analyses on
more than 50 ceramic pieces from 13 archaeological sites. In order to
identify the inorganic ingredients of the pigments we used a
multi-analytical approach, including various techniques. Leading
analysis is XRD (X-ray diffraction), considering that the white paste
is made up of inorganic materials as various minerals.
