---
layout: abstract

title: "Agriculture as Niche Construction: Eco-Cultural Niche Evolution During the Neolithic (c. 6200 – 4900 BC) of the Struma River Valley"

author: "Brent Robbie Whitford"

institution: "Trent University, Peterborough ON, Canada"

keywords: "Neolithic, Agriculture, Niche Construction, Ecological
          Niche, Eco-Cultural Niche Modeling, Bulgaria, Greece"
---

The Neolithic Period (c. 6200 – 4900 BC) in the Struma River Valley
led to numerous episodes of cultural diversification. When compared
with the neighbouring regions, the ecological characteristics of the
Struma River Valley are particularly heterogeneous and the Neolithic
populations must have adapted to this distinctive and localized
ecological setting. It then becomes reasonable to ask if the evolution
of cultural variability in the Struma River Valley was at least
partially driven by the ecological setting and differentiation in the
evolution of the early agricultural niche. I apply an approach based
on niche construction theory and Maxent species distribution modeling
in order to characterize the relationship between culture and ecology
during each stage of the Neolithic Period in the Struma River Valley
and to assess diachronic change. An interpretation of the results
demonstrates that the continuous reconstruction of the early
agricultural niche allowed for settlement expansion into new
eco-cultural niches presenting different natural selection pressures
and that cultural change followed. I also found that cultural and
historical contingencies played an equally important role on the
evolution of populations and that ecological factors alone cannot
account for the numerous episodes of cultural diversification that
occurred throughout the region.
