---
layout: abstract

title: "The Visual Language of Signs and Symbols of the Elite in the Byzantine World"

author: "Georgi Sengalevich"

institution: ""

keywords: ""
---

The issue of heraldry as a codified system of signs, symbols and
images used by the aristocracy of the Medieval West is well known and
explored. Unfortunately this is not the case of the similar and
contemporary phenomena that appear during the 13th-15th centuries in
Byzantium and the wider area – in Medieval Bulgaria, Serbia, Moldavia,
etc. This paper will not discuss the somewhat controversial issue of
the existence or not of feudalism in the Byzantine world, but aims to
focus on the visual representations of the ruling emperors, dynasties,
patriarchs, other dignitaries and noble people that composed the elite
and therefore used a specific ‘language’ of signs and symbols to
manifest their status. Among images and motifs such as the
double-headed eagle, the fleur-de-lis, the gaming square, the rampant
lion, should be mentioned. It is still rather unclear if the origin of
this imagery could be traced in the West, with which Byzantium and the
other Orthodox countries maintained intensive relations, and where
heraldry already existed as a system since the 11th-12th centuries. At
first glance the borrowing and imitation of the Western visual
language representing a fully developed feudal order sounds quite
reasonable. On the other hand however, a more thorough approach would
prove that the ‘heraldry’ in the Byzantine East has its own specific
and distinct meaning and use, and in many cases its origins should be
traced far beyond any Western influences. The aforementioned
‘heraldic’ symbols and depictions were almost never linked to a
particular aristocrat, noble family or dynasty, but were either put
into widespread and shared use by different dignitaries or were aimed
to represent a general concept of state and power. First and foremost,
the most common and personalized symbols of the elite were not in the
form of coats of arms or any other figurative images, but in the form
of monograms. One possible explanation for that major distinctive
feature might be the higher level of education and literacy that the
society, or at least its elite, obtained. Furthermore the tradition of
abbreviating personal and family names and titles in this specific way
dates back to the Early Byzantine period, when emperors and empresses
like Justinian (527-565) and Theodora used to mark with monograms
their construction achievements. And this practice, never abandoned,
grew even more common in the Late Byzantine period. It became a
fashion to the point that monograms were present åverywhere: depicted
on fortification walls and towers, carved on the sculptural decoration
of churches, embroidered on precious textiles, engraved on richly
adorned jewellery and even incised on ceramic vessels, used in
everyday life. During the 14th century this fashion was embraced and
put into wide use by the tsars, the patriarchs and other dignitaries
of Medieval Bulgaria. The use of monograms to represent ruler’s names
and titles could be traced by late 14th century also in the fractured
Western Balkans as well as to the north of Danube. And it well
demonstrates the existence of a special visual language employed by
the elites of the Byzantine world in order to communicate between each
other, but also to display their status within the society and in
foreign relations.
