---
layout: abstract

title: "Living in the Habitus: Daily Life-Ways in Neolithic Northern
       Greece"

author: "Kathy Baneva"

institution: "Cardiff University"

keywords: ""
---

This paper will present the case for a methodological and theoretical
framework for the detection of everyday activities at Neolithic
sites. The specific site I will use for this is Late Neolithic Dimini,
Northern Greece. This settlement has an especially well recorded and
high resolution, high quality data for occupation levels, domestic
structures use and alteration, and development of communal spaces. I
argue that this type of research archive is sufficient in detail to
enable the writing of daily life-ways narratives for the occupants of
the site. Moreover, I argue the case that only through a better
understanding of the working of this Late Neolithic society can we
venture to better understand the changes in material production habits
and changes.  The everyday has been a somewhat elusive concept in
archaeology, and explicably so because of the difficulty in producing
high resolution data from a big number of excavated sites. I will
present the case, however, of the importance in perceiving of the
everyday when also regarding such matters as chronology establishment
and site synchronisation.

The concept of habitus is well know in the social sciences, as is its
creator Pierre Bourdieu. This talk will also offer a simple, yet not
simplistic, explanation, of how the habitus/agency/fields of action
theoretical framework can serve the production of comprehensive
narratives for the lives of people in prehistory.
