---
layout: abstract

title: "Food in Ancient Thrace: The Depiction of Food and Dining
       Practices on the Thracian Wall Paintings"

author: "Lenka Parvoničová"

institution: "Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic"

keywords: "Thrace, Tombs, Wall Painting, Food, Feasting"
---

Recent research on food in Antiquity is based in particular on writing
sources, analyses of archaeobotanical remains and organic residues and
chemical analyses of human bones. Together with an iconographic
analysis of reliefs and wall paintings, it is possible to obtain a
relatively complete picture of the ancient cuisine. Reconstruction of
food and eating habits is one of the basic aspects of the daily life.

Food is an essential element we need to survive, but it also
represents a great pleasure in human life. It is no surprise that
fruit, vegetables, meat and various drinks have been a favorite motif
for paintings on walls from Antiquity to the present time. Wall
paintings located in funerary complexes often show banquet scenes,
interpreted as funeral feasts, featuring food and drink along with
illustrations of contemporary serving and consuming. As is also known
from the Greek, Etruscan and Roman frescoes, food combined with
banquets and death symbolized a cheerful and happy afterlife.  In the
last few decades, numerous monumental tombs, most frequently dated to
the 5th-3rd century B.C., have been discovered in the territory of
Thrace. Besides the significant Greek influence on the local tomb
architecture, it is also possible to observe a strong connection with
the Greek and Macedonian decorative styles. The most important
frescoes of the Classical and Hellenistic period are well preserved,
for example, in the tombs of Kazanlak and Alexandorovo.

The proposed study is an attempt to identify specific components of
the diet and the funeral feast depicted on the wall paintings of the
Thracian tombs as well as to interpret them in the social and
religious context.
