---
layout: abstract

title: "Early Medieval Weapons for Close Battle with North-European
       Origin Within Bulgarian Lands Today"

author: "Samuil Kamburov"

institution: "Sofia University “St.Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Early Medieval Swords, Warfare, Weapons, Vikings,
          Varangians, Balkans, Scandinavia, Byzantium"
---

The period from the beginning of 9th century to the middle of 11th
century in European history is known as a “Viking period”. This is a
time when Scandinavian tribes start their military campaign form the
territory of Norway, Sweden, Finland and Norwest parts of Russia to
the West, Central and Southeast Europe. For the political center of
the Vikings was chosen the island Gotland in Baltic Sea. From there
exactly starts “The Viking road to Constantinople” (Miklagard – the
Scandinavian name of the city) which is described in “De Administrando
Imperio” by emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus (913-959). This
road was the basic commercial artery for exchange of goods between
Byzantium and Scandinavia. This trade route crossed the rivers in the
territory of West Russia and Ukraine and reach to the mouth of Dnieper
River. From the Northern Black Sea coast Varangians reached to the
mouth of Danube and thence by sea reached to the capital of Byzantine
Empire. The Balkans was being raided mainly from “East Normans” or
so-called “Varangians” during the second half of 10th century. This
happen after the consolidation of the tribes in South Russia and the
emergence of Kievan Rus. It is about the campaign of the Kiev prince
Svetoslav from 968-971 AD against the Bulgarian lands and
Constantinople. In this time on the throne in Constantinople was
emperor John I Tzimiskes who rules the Empire during the period
969-976 AD. This is the first witnessed ground military operations of
the Varangians in the territories south of Danube. These military
operations are described in detail in the essay “History” by Leo The
Deacon. That is precisely why, the campaigns of prince Svetoslav could
be accepted as terminus postquem for the elements of military
equipment with North-European origin in Bulgarian lands excavated
nowadays. Shortly after the Christianization of Kievan Rus in 988AD,
emperor Basil II (976-1025) recruits about 6000 Varangians for his
personal guards. This was the famous “Varangian corps” of the
mercenary soldiers in the service of the emperors of Byzantium.

The presence of Varangians in Bulgarian lands today is evidenced by
findings related with items of military suit and weaponry. In this
work particular attention will be paid of the development of so-called
“Nordic art styles” whose traces is most clearly tracked on the
ornamentation of weaponry with North-European origin. The research of
findings related with weapons for close battle (so-called “Cool
weapons”) with Scandinavian origin in Bulgarian lands today is of
particular importance for the study of the Early Medieval warfare in
the Lower Danube area because this type of artifacts makes up a large
part of the arsenal of cut and thrust weapons found south of Danube
and dated in the period 9th – 11th century.
