---
layout: abstract

title: "Pottery Assemblage from the Late Eneolithic Settlement Devnya"

author: "Stanimir Parvanov"

institution: "Sofia University “St.Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Devnya Settlement, Varna Lakes Region, Late Eneolithic
          Pottery, Varna Culture"
---

The settlement of Devnya was excavated during the summer of 1969, as
part of the rescue excavations of the known Early Medieval cemetery
Devnya-3. It is located on the first overflown terrace of the west
shore of the Beloslav lake, and more exactly on its east
end. According to the excavations leader Ivan Ivanov, the settlement
contains one layer, which is 20 cm thick and based on the materials
found, it belongs to the Late Eneolithic period. In the short
publication on the settlement from 1972, I. Ivanov shows the main
features of the pottery, presenting most of the well preserved and
interesting examples.

The aim of this paper is to analyze in more details the pottery found
in the settlement. It is stored in the collection of Varna
Archaeological Museum and in its majority has not been handled or
published until now. Most of the pottery is highly fragmented and the
number of the well preserved specimens is low. Also, some specimens
are washed, covered with calcareous concretion or subjected to
secondary burning. However, the pottery is very important to handle,
because it comes from one of the few settlements from the region of
Varna lakes, which are excavated archaeologically. The specimens,
which could be typologically assigned or those in a very good
condition are in sufficient amount to allow the technological,
typological and ornamentation analyses of the pottery. They give us
more valuable data for complementing the pottery-based characteristics
of the population inhabiting this region and also of the Varna
Culture, in which the settlement falls geographically. Also, it is
necessary to see whether the pottery assemblage shows the same
features, known from the materials from the other sites from the
region and to look for the chronological connection between them. The
analysis of the pottery from one layered settlement could also be very
helpful in the future for answering other important questions
concerning the chronological position of the sites in the lakes region
and the relative chronology between them.
