---
layout: abstract

title: "Pits Without Burials from the Necropolis at Kozareva Mogila"

author: "Veselin Danov, Radoslav Rachev"

institution: "Sofia University “St.Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Necropolis, Eneolithic, Cenotaph"
---

Cult practices play a key role in day-to-day life. We present here
pits not containing burials discovered within the area of the
Eneolithic necropolis of the Kozareva Mogila settlement mound. In this
paper we discuss two of them. They belong to the Late Eneolithic and
the Kodjadermen–Gumelniţa–Karanovo VI culture. This is the time when
the practice of burials in necropolises became widespread in the
Eastern Balkans. These pits have similar characteristics that
distinguish them from other assemblages in the necropolis. They have
identical sizes and shapes: an oval horizontal section and a
bell-shaped vertical section. The filler of both features contains
pieces of burnt daubs, small pieces of charcoal, and ceramic
fragments. Several pots were completely or almost competely
reconstructed, including large storage vessels or pithoi. The presence
of “buried” pithoi and debris from buildings raises certain questions
concerning the practices carried out in the necropolises, as well as
their symbolic meaning. They indicate that the necropolises probably
had a great sacral importance for the communities under exploration,
going beyond the common understanding of them as mere burial grounds.

To explain the practice of depositing of such objects we point to
parallels from ethnological descriptions of other communities from
historical times, taking in consideration all the uncertainties coming
from such comparisons.
