---
layout: abstract

title: "Anthropomorphic Figurines with Metal Ornaments in the
        Kodjadermen-Gumelnița-Karanovo VI Cultural Area"

author: "Adelina Darie"

institution: "Bucharest Municipal Museum"

keywords: ""
---

This study emphasizes the association between two distinct raw
material sources and object categories: the anthropomorphic figurines
with metal ornaments, especially copper and gold.

First of all, this presentation will cover mainly the distribution of
antropomorphic figurines with metal ornaments in the
Kodjadermen-Gumelnița-Karanovo VI cultural area (e.g
Căscioarele-Ostrovel, Pietrele-Măgura Gorgana, Sultana, Vidra,
Măriuța, Karanovo etc.); the importance of the raw material sources
used by the prehistoric communities to manufacture the figurines as
well as the ornaments. In Kodjadermen-Gumelnița-Karanovo VI complex,
the figurines with metal ornaments were made mainly of bone, with some
exceptions (the clay figurine identified in the Durankulak
necropolis).

We will analyze the connection between the archaeological context and
the identification of the figurines (the majority of them were found
in settlements). The morphological and technological approach is
necessary, because of the specificity of this category of materials.

The distribution of the ornaments on the figurine bodies will be
discussed (head, neck, abdomen, ankle. The association of the human
representations with ornaments (rings, earrings, ankle ornaments) line
out the anatomical details of the figurines.

The widely distribution of the antropomorphic figurines is well known
across the study area, so the identification of the metal ornaments
alow us to give the material a diferent interpretation. We have to
take into account the symbolism of the anthropomorphic figurines with
metal ornaments, as an association between common ( bone, clay) and
exotic (copper and gold) materials was made.

Also, a parallel between the distribution of the burial inventory in
Kodjadermen-Gumelnița-Karanovo VI cultural area and the distribution
of the metal ornaments on the figurine bodies (head, neck, abdomen,
ankle) will be discussed.

In Southeastern Romanian Neo-eneolitic archaeological necropolis there
were discovered burials which contained inventory such as malachite
beads (e.g. Cernica, Sultana-Malu Roșu), similar to the inventory
found in the Durankulak burials.

We will analyse the distribution of the inventory on the skeletons, as
well as the symbolism applied.

Last but not least, the phenomena of the antropomorphic figurines with
metal ornaments discoveries generates characteristics which could
apply to the entire cultural complex, from the southeastern Romania,
as well as northern Bulgaria.

To conclude, this presentation focuses on the study of the
anthropomorphic figurines with metal ornaments from the study area
(raw materials, morphological and technological characteristics,
symbolism), with a parallel to the distribution of the inventory in
the KGK VI burials, southeastern Romania specifically.
