---
layout: abstract

title: "The Cult of Theos Hypsistos in Balkan Provinces of the Roman Empire"

author: "Adrian-Viorel Martin"

institution: "Babe≈ü-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca"

keywords: "Balkan, Theos Hypsistos, Greco-Roman Religion, Epigraphy"

session_id: "18aa"

timeslot: "16.00 - 16.30"
---

More than any other cult of the Roman world, the worship of Theos
Hypsistos has been taken to illustrate the predisposition among pagans
of the second and third centuries AD to worship a single, remote, and
abstract deity hidden behind the appellatives Zeus Hypsistos, Theos
Hypsistos or Hypsistos, in preference to the anthropomorphic figures
of conventional paganism.

This study emphasizes the connection of the Theos Hypsistos
worshippers within the Balkan provinces of the Roman Empire and their
linking with the Greco-Roman religious system. Furthermore, we will
analyse the archeological and the epigraphic evidence for Theos
Hypsistos in the main centres where this cult is found. Another aspect
that will be shown are the close relations between the Jewish groups
and Theos Hypsistos.

The Balkan provinces of the Roman Empire have some important centres
of Hypsistos cult, Godfearers, and Jewish Communities outside
Palestine. The aim of this papper is to present the relations between
cults mentioned above, and for this we will make a travel in each
important center, from Beroaea and Thessalonica to Oescus, from
Selymbria to Tomis. Another important point of this presentation is
the chronology of the cult, from the 2nd century B.C to 3rd century
C.E, the rise and the slow decline of the cult centres.

Last but no least, we will analyse Dacia, as the northern province
from Balkans where the cult of Theos Hypsistos is found.
