---
layout: abstract

title: "Cooperation and Collective in the Dacian World.
        Archaeological Perspectives"

author: "Alin Henț"

institution: "Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca"

keywords: ""
---

In different parts of the world individuals choose to cooperate as
part of communities. The ways in which we cooperate and the limits of
our cooperation are two of the most important principles for social
groups. In the same time we can be very competitive. From an
biological point of view is said that much of the human uniquness rest
in our abilities to cooperate at larger scales and in different
manners.

The Enlightenment schoolars spoke in favour of rationalism and
progress also reflecting on people participation in social groupings
when their primary motivations tend to be selfish. Moreover, these
particular social relations were further developed in the
nineteenth-century by Karl Marx or Max Weber.

Archaeologists have been investigating the trajectories of cooperation
and competition in past societies for decades, but have tended to
emphasize competition in seeking to explain those processes underlying
cultural evolution.

Moving from theory to practice and bringing archaeology into play,
this paper wants to find cooperation in the archaeological remains of
the Late Iron Age in Romania (1st century BC – 1st century AD). Under
scrutiny will be the fortifications from south-western
Transylvania. Bringing together the construction system of the
fortifications, the monumental size of civilian and religious edifices
in an unwelcoming landscape, indicate a distinctive profile of the
local community at the end of the Iron Age, assumed through
cooperation.
