---
layout: abstract

title: "Intra-Settlement Use of Space at Late Bronze Age Greece:
        a Preliminary Archaeobotanical Exploration of Crop Storage
        and Refuse Disposal Strategies in the 2nd Mil. BC Aegean"

author: "Angeliki Karathanou"

institution: "Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
              Dep. of History and Archaeology"
keywords: "Storage, Disposal, Taphonomic Factors,
           Late Bronze Age, Aegean"
---

Archaeobotanical data from the Late Bronze Age (1700-1050 BC) layers
of four settlements located across the north-south axis of mainland
Greece are used to explore intra-settlement use of space as regards
crop storage and refuse disposal. Preservation and recovery methods
being well known in the literature as crucial taphonomic factors
affecting the composition, quantity and quality of the
archaeobotanical assemblages, this paper examines more closely two of
their aspects: destruction by fire and sampling strategy. Preliminary
results are based on the ongoing PhD study of ca. 1700 samples
collected either systematically (Thessaloniki Toumba, Mitrou and Ayios
Vassileios) or based on judgment sampling (Kynos), and in certain
cases from in situ preserved fire destruction layers (Kynos, Mitrou,
Ayios Vassileios). The samples represent a variety of indoor and
outdoor contexts such as floors, pits, postholes, clay- and stone-made
constructions, pithoi and other vessels, hearths and burnt “lenses”,
rubbish pits, fill and street deposits. Analysis shows that both
factors greatly affect, among others, sample composition and therefore
the degree to which storage patterns and refuse disposal are
archaeobotanically visible and therefore reconstructed. Sites where
preservation is by burnt destruction episodes, reveal direct storage
evidence and allow for a discussion of storage organization, as is the
case for Kynos, Mitrou and Ayios Vasileios where crops were found
either still contained in storage vessels or spilled on floor
surfaces. Refuse deposits are very well represented at sites sampled
systematically, allowing for a thorough study of their spatial
distribution and management practices within settlement space. Also,
where sampling is systematic, archaeobotanical composition and
contextual analysis provide direct or indirect evidence for
storage. For example at Thessaloniki Toumba waste discarding was
apparently not related to any specifically defined intra-settlement
area, while crop storage, though not seen as in situ preserved
concentrations, is suggested by small more or less pure grain
concentrations in secondary deposits such as hearth
contents. Completion of analysis of each data-set will allow for a
reconstruction of storage and/or refuse disposal strategies at the
settlements under study, thus providing a methodologically sound basis
for a comparative diachronic investigation of intra-settlement use of
space during the late 2ndmillenium BC, when major sociopolitical
changes occur in the Aegean encompassing both the rise and fall of
palatial centres in the Mycenaean southern and central Greece, as well
as the emergence and establishment of loose hierarchical networks in
the North.