---
layout: abstract

title: "The Lower Paleolithic Around Marmara Sea"

author: "Berkay Dinçer"

institution: "Istanbul University"

keywords: "Lower Paleolithic, Lithic Technology, Hominin Dispersals, Marmara Sea"
---

Today Marmara Sea separates Balkan and Anatolian peninsulas from each
other. However it does not constitute a permanent border. Due to sea
level changes during the Pleistocene, the Marmara Sea became a fresh
water lake at least a several times and terrestrial areas around it
were expanded, creating a land-bridge between Anatolia and
Balkans. This land-bridge is one of the most probable routes for Lower
Paleolithic hominins to disperse through Europe.

Yarımburgaz Cave is the only excavated Paleolithic site in this
region. Archaeological remains in this cave were dated to
approximately 390 ka, a cold period in the middle of the Middle
Pleistocene. Assemblage of the Yarımburgaz Cave consists mainly
flakes, retouched and non-retouched. Surveys in Eastern Thrace (north
of the Marmara Sea) revealed a dense occupation during the Lower
Paleolithic, many Lower Paleolithic sites have been discovered in
recent years. All of the assemblages of these sites are characterized
in the dominance of core tools (choppers and chopping tools) made on
quartz and quartzite pebbles. This might indicate earlier industries
than the Yarımburgaz assemblage since percentage of core tools at
Yarımburgaz are not very high.

In the south of the Marmara Sea, in contrast to the northern part,
Lower Paleolithic sites are not numerous and assemblages include low
number of bifacial tools along with high percentages of flakes. If it
is not the result of different geomorphological histories of two
areas, this might be the result of the existence two different
techno-cultural groups around Marmara Sea. However, except the
technological and typological analyses, it has not been possible to
obtain radiometric dates from any of these surface sites at both
areas.

Despite the difficulty of dating the assemblages, this region around
Marmara Sea where Anatolia and the Balkans come together, offers much
to understand technological adaptations of Lower Paleolithic
hominins. Here I will present the first results of long-term
Paleolithic survey projects in this very important region.
