---
layout: abstract

title: "Iron Metallurgy in the North-Western Pontic Area (1200-500
        BC).  Old and New Perspectives"

author: "Cătălin Cozma"

institution: "Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Iași"

keywords: "Early Iron Age, NW Pontic Area, Iron Metallurgy, Iron
           Technology, Archaeometry, New Perspectives"

session_id: "18ma"

timeslot: "09.00 - 09.30"
---

This paper is a review of the course of research during the last
century into the history of iron working in the North-Western Pontic
area. It comprises three sections: a summary of the chronology and the
spread of the iron working onto the study region; a description of the
main research trends concerning the iron metallurgy evolution and some
lines of future enquiry.

At the end of the 19th century and in the first half of the 20th
century writing on the iron metallurgy was dominated by discussion on
the possible role of the Scythians and of the Western Hallstattian
culture in the spread of the iron artefacts in the study area. During
the second half of the 20th century, due to the intensification of the
archaeological excavations at a broader regional scale, new evidences
pertained for an earlier use of iron in this region. The
archaeological evidences consists of both iron objects and debris
resulting from the metallurgical process such as slag (Babadag,
Dervent), iron loops (Dervent) or tools used for manufacturing the
iron artefacts (Teliţa, Vânători, Cernatu).

During this timpe span the research strategies in the Romanian
archaeology have focused mainly on understanding the cultural and
chronological significance of the artefacts, using mostly the
typological method. Most of these studies issued by I. Nestor,
M. Petrescu-Dîmboviţa, K. Horedt, A. László, Al. Vulpe and N. Boroffka
have debated the spread of the iron metallurgy from the Aegean region
to the Balkans and to the Lower Danube region or from the main
Hallstatt area to the Western Balkans.

The other research strategy have centered on several crucial factors
for understanding the „coming of the age of iron” (Wertime and Muhly
1980): the presence of ores in the study region and the technology
used for processing the raw materials into finished artefacts (E. Zah,
Ş. Olteanu and A. Stoia). Theirwork have produced only a few studiess
of regional importance which were not correlated with other regions of
influence on a much broader European scale.

In recent years, studies published by Sorin Ailincăi and Adrian
Adamescu have advanced the hypothesis, based on the analysis of the
old and new excavations from Dobruja and Southern Moldavia, that the
established chronology and cultural evolution no longer fits into the
previously established patterns. This requires a review of the origin
and spread of the iron metallurgy, but also the necessity for
understanding the iron technology by adding archeometrical and
experimental data.
