---
layout: abstract

title: "First Insights on the Antler Industry from the
        Prehistoric Lakeside Settlement Anarghiri IXb,
        Western Macedonia, Greece"

author: "Christopher Arabatzis"

institution: "University of Bern"

keywords: "Antler Artifacts, Lakeside Settlement,
           Western Macedonia, Neolithic, Bronze Age"

session_id: "19ap"

timeslot: "15.15 - 15.45"
---

The last fifteen years the Archaeological Service of Florina has
conducted extensive surface surveys and large scale excavations in the
Prefecture of Florina that changed dramatically our knowledge about
the prehistory of this part of Western Macedonia.

Most of the excavations where held in the coal mining zone of the
Public Power Corporation near to the lakes Chimaditis and
Zazari. According to recent data, between the four lakes of the area
(Lake Chimaditis, Lake ZazariLake Vegoritida and Lake Petron) a lot of
prehistoric settlements were established that date back to Greek Early
Neolithic (6700/6500-5800/5600 BC) to Late Bronze Age (1700/1500-1100
BC).

It seems that many of the settlements, that were established in the
northern shore of the lake Chimaditis and near to the lake Zazari,
were wetland settlements. One of the most important lakeside
settlement that is still being excavated is the Anarghiri IXb
settlement located near to the modern village of Anarghiri. The
investigation so far yielded thousands of wooden piles that were used
in house infrastructure, wooden structures that can be characterized
as bridges or pathways inside the lake, a lot of thermal structures
and thousands of figurines, chipped stone tools and osseous artifacts.

So far there were almost 500 antler artifacts, making this assemblage
the biggest worked antler assemblage in prehistoric Greece. Their
study showed the presence of semi products, completely manufactured
items and waste. The assemblage is characterized by a great
variability as so far there have been found picks, bevel ended tools,
intermediate tools, axes, projectile points, harpoons, maceheads,
shaft straightners, ornaments and figurines.

In this short presentation there will be an attempt to present the
preliminary results of the ongoing study of the antler artifacts, that
is related with their manufacture, the typology, the raw material
preferences and use.
