---
layout: abstract

title: "Furniture with Type B Decoration from Thrace"

author: "Danaila Grudeva"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: ""
---

The monumental tombs in Thrace from the Late Classical and Hellenistic
period are very important for the study on the relations between the
Thracian territories and Greece, Asia Minor and Macedonia as their
plans, building materials, construction and architectural decoration
reflect the main trends in the architecture of the Mediterranean world
during these periods. An important aspect of the study on the Thracian
tomb architecture is the examination of the furniture used in their
interior. The material collected so far is sufficient enough to allow
us to draw a relatively clear picture of the furniture types used in
the Thracian tombs and show the influence which Asia Minor, Greece and
Macedonia had over the tomb furnishing in Thrace. The importance of
the problem is further emphasized by the recently published
comprehensive studies on the furniture (mainly funerary couches) from
the neighbouring areas.

The main focus point in these studies are the klinai as they are the
most common type of furniture used in the interior of the tombs. The
typology of H. Kyrieleis which is used in all major publications on
the topic, divides the furniture into three main types - A, B and C,
based on the decoration of their front side. Examples of all three
types are also found in Thrace. The current paper will focus on the
furniture with type B decoration from burial complexes in Thrace and
will present their main features, stylistic characteristics, possible
influences and chronological framework. The type B furniture is
characterized by rectangular legs with semicircular incisions on each
side; volutes at the four ends of the cutouts; small circular discs
resembling volute eyes in the middle of the cutout sections and
palmettes above and below the incisions. The examples of type B
furniture from Thrace are the two funerary beds from the tomb in
Ginina mogila near Sveshtari (the Caryatids tomb), the kline from the
tomb at Naip, the kline from the tomb at Varbitsa, the funerary bed in
the Ostrusha tomb near Kazanluk and the kline-sarcophagus from the
tomb in Malko Belovo. Another funerary bed coming from a tomb near
Tekirdag which is currently on view in the lapidarium of the
Archaeological museum in Tekirdag also belongs to this type. Klinai
were found in two more tombs in Southeastern Thrace - the tomb in the
"C" tumulus at Kirklareli and the tomb at Kirklareli-Eriklice. The
researchers suggest that they belong to the same type based on their
closeness to the Naip tomb. Unfortunately these are neither published
nor preserved so their further analysis is not possible.

The examples mentioned above show that furniture with type B
decoration is spread throughout whole Thrace during the Late Classical
and Hellenistic period and are an evidence for the contacts between
Thrace and the neighbouring areas during these periods. They also
suggest that the trends, typical for the architecture and the
architectural decoration in the Mediterranean region, were known and
used in Thrace as well. The tendency to install furniture in funerary
contexts developed in the Thracian territories simultaneously with the
other neighbouring areas and is connected to the idea of heroizating
the deceased.
