---
layout: abstract

title: "Old Sinies: an Abandoned Medieval Settlement in the North East
        Part of Corfu"

author: "Dimitra Zoi"

institution: "University of Ioannina"

keywords: "Corfu Island, Pantokrator, Old Sinies, Medieval,
           Settlement, Post Byzantine, Frescoes, Rural Architecture"
---

A particularly important residential complex of 23 medieval
settlements lies in the northeastern mountainous part of Corfu, at the
foot of the highest peak of mount Pantokrator (absl.  906m.). The
settlements, others abandoned and some with continuous habitation
until now, are typical examples of urban and religious architecture
and art, as enshrined and developed in numerous rural settlements of
the island.

The settlements were first mentioned in literary sources in
1347A.D. in a document of priest and a monk Anthimos Peritheioti,
which refers to the founding of the monastery of the High Pantokrator,
on top of the mount Pantokrator.

One of the 23 medieval settlements in the northeast part of the island
is Old Sinies. Today, the settlement is abandoned. Nevertheless, for
almost five centuries it was a well-organized and self- sufficient
small provincial residential complex. The settlement (460 to
486m. absl.) is located in a protected area with particularly intense
relieves. This kind of geomorphology along with the steep mountain
ridges, the intense natural slopes, the existence of streams and
rugged hillsides, has been the key to the spatial organization of the
settlement, which was developed in separate residential units with no
clear boundaries between them. The central core of the town is defined
by a main road.  Right and left of this road smaller streets are
developed, with upward and downward slopes leading to houses which are
storey or single floor constructions, typical of traditional Corfiot
rural architecture. They have simple and austere facades with small
openings for ventilation and room lighting. Internal spaces are
austere too. Most of the houses are "closed type houses" without
balconies, having the main entrance to the narrow or the wide side of
the building. The external staircase, which leads to a covered terrace
on the second floor, is a common characteristic feature in storey
houses in Old Sinies and generally in Corfu.

The settlement also includes three single-room temples, St. Theodore
Stratilatis, St. George and the Holy Trinity temple, which preserve
fragments of post-Byzantine frescoes. This kind of frescoes are the
most representative specimens of art, which are found mostly in the
province, far away from the urban center of Corfu.