---
layout: abstract

title: "Gornja Tuzla – Neolithic Settlement of Northern Bosnia"

author: "Dženan Brigić"

institution: "University of Zagreb"

keywords: "Gornja Tuzla, Starčevo, Vinča Culture,
           Middle-Late Neolithic"

session_id: "19mp-not-coming"

timeslot: "09.30 - 10.00"
---

Gornja Tuzla is located in northeastern Bosnia on the final slopes of
the mountain Majevica, with upper stream of smaller river Jala,
dislocated around 10 km northeast from modern city of Tuzla. The site
is intensively destroyed, with the majority of damage belonging to the
youngest layers. Conducting his research back ih 1960's, Čović
calculated the surface of the site between 12 and 15 hectares. On the
surface of the site, at the bottom of tell, it is possible to see the
remains of red coarse pottery which belongs to the Starčevo
culture. So far, two trenches were excavated on the site. First one
was opened 1958, where Čović managed to create a stratigraphy for
Gornja Tuzla settlement which is still admitted in scientific
circles. Owing to mentioned excavations, it is known that the oldest
layers of the site belongs to the Starčevo culture of Middle Neolithic
period, which was later inherited by the younger Neolithic Vinča
culture, and later on even younger Eneolithic cultures which
demonstrate the continuity of tell's life. Second excavation took
place in 2008/09 when smaller trench was open but the results of those
works have not been published yet, since there are only remains of
pottery in Museum without any documentation that will provide more
detailed information. In this paper, the idea is to sum up all
relevant information about settlement in Gornja Tuzla with the results
of previous excavations as well as presenting the site’s chronology in
frame of contemporary chronological schemes of the Middle and Late
Neolithic of SE Europe. Gornja Tuzla presents one of the western-most
tells in Europe, therefore, playing a crucial role in understanding of
transitional Middle-to-Late Neolithic processes as well as
disintegration of the Neolithic Period belonging to fading away of the
Vinča Culture in general sense. This work is one of the first stages
in preparing a new, detailed archaeological project which is in
initial phase.
