---
layout: abstract

title: "Sgraffito Ceramics with Underglaze Inscriptions from the Great
        Laura of the Holy Forty Martyrs in Tarnovo: New Parallels"

author: "Georgi Sengalevich"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Tarnovo, Sgraffito Ceramics, Monograms, Inscriptions"
---

The 14th century presents a new fashion in the Byzantine culture of
writing with the intensified use of monograms and other abbreviations
for different purposes and in different contexts. We could distinguish
them in a luxurious group of Medieval Glazed ceramics with sgraffito
decoration: plates, bowls and cups, produced mainly in Constantinople,
which bear the monograms of different saints, placed underglaze, the
emblem of the ruling Palaeologan dynasty etc. These vessels,
distributed exceptionally across the shores of Black and Aegean Sea
through the mediation of Genoese and Venetians merchants, most
probably have inspired the appearance of similar ceramics with
Cyrillic monograms and other abbreviations, produced in the inland of
Medieval Bulgaria during the course of 14th century and spread mainly
in its capital Tarnovo. One of the most important sacred complexes
there – the royal Great laura, dedicated to the Holy Forty Martyrs of
Sebaste, is the source of an abundant set of inscriptions, engraved
underglaze on vessels, used by the monastery brothers in their
everyday life. A group of more than 67 plates with the letter “M”,
unearthed by the archaeologists, dominate the whole picture. This
inscription was first deciphered by At. Popov as the monogram of
Bulgarian tsar Michael Shishman (1323-1330), but later was
reinterpreted as the number sign for 40 – obviously placed on the
vessels to mark them as property of the monastery. It is remarkable
that the same practice was noticed in the Serbian monastery of
Studenica, where the recent excavations have unearthed some vessels of
the same period, marked with the Cyrillic letter “C”. Other vessels
with underglaze inscriptions, found in the Tarnovo’s Great Laura, tell
us a different story. The engraved personal names are of great
interest and historical significance. Among them we should highlight
the royal monograms of tsar Ivan Alexander (1331-1371) and tsar Ivan
Shishman (1371-1395), and the abbreviated names and titles of the
Bulgarian patriarchs Theodosius and Euthymius, known to us from other
sites in Tarnovo too. It is still uncertain if they were personal
belongings, thus the inscriptions mark property, or they were rather
received as gifts by the monastic brotherhood. Other category
comprises few liturgical vessels – chalices with Christian
formulae. But the most enigmatic of all samples is a plate with a
whole Greek-language maledictive text against theft. At this point we
can conclude that the Great Laura of the Holy Forty in Tarnovo is a
unique example of complex where different types of locally produced
Glazed Sgraffito Ceramics with underglaze inscriptions of diverse
meaning were used.
