---
layout: abstract

title: "The Permeability Level of the Early Byzantine Northern Balkan
        Limes as a Reflection of the General State System Failure"

author: "Hristijan Talevski"

institution: "Institute for Old Slavic Culture - Prilep"

keywords: "Balkan, Limes, Early Byzantine, Settlements,
           Disintegration, Decline"
---

The subject of this study is an attempt to investigate the early
Byzantine Balkan limes in the northern Balkan region. Although this
topic has been widely discussed in the past by a number of scholars,
there is a need for reconsideration of some thesis and ideas,
throughout the results from the newest archaeological excavations. We
believe that a detailed research of the problems associated with
existence, structure, effectiveness, permeability and security around
the borderline, in great part will contribute towards answering many
questions connected with the overall fall and disintegration of the
early Byzantine system of government and administration and questions
around the serious cultural decline. Most of the problems around the
limes are connected with the strategic reorganization for
strengthening and parallel decay, disintegration and general
reorganization of the settlements inside the Balkans. This is made by,
and for the needs of the local communities during their struggle for
survival in a time of climate change, depopulation, earthquakes,
constant barbarian raids and the begging of a permanent settling of
the exogenous population. In the second half of the sixth and the
seventh century, almost everything comes down to self-supporting and
survival through decentralization and local management of resources,
production, and defense. Byzantium only formally retained authority
over part of the Balkan provinces, primarily through numerous
strategic strongholds, mostly located offshore, on the islands and
rarely inland. Only in those places in some form retained the urban
elite and the military "aristocracy". Newly established limes far
south, placed to defend the coast from attacks coming from the
hinterland, and purely formal authority in great part of the
territories concurred during Justinian`s reign, indicate the complete
disintegration of the administrative, tax system, the economic
downturn and the collapse of the military system and organization in
the Balkans. All the considered problems will be seen through the
prism of the complex cultural, historical and socioeconomic framework
of the period.