---
layout: abstract

title: "Ofrynio Toumba, an Example of Habitation in Eastern Macedonia
        (Northern Greece) During the Late Bronze Age"

author: "Ioannis Soukantos"

institution: "University of Thessaly, Department of
              History-Archaeology and Social Anthropology"

keywords: "Northern Greece, Kavala, Late Bronze Age, Toumba, Habitation"

---

Ofrynio Toumba, known today by the local name ‘Harman Tepe’, is a
typical Late Bronze Age (1600-1100BC) site located 60 km west of the
city of Kavala and 2 km southeast of the modern village of Ofrynio in
the Municipality of Pangaion, in Northern Greece. The geographical
position of the tell on the west bank of the Strymon river, near the
coastline of Orphanos bay and south of the metalliferous Mount
Pangaion, emphasizes its geostrategic role and attests to its
character as an important prehistoric settlement. Analogous sites east
of the Strymon river are relatively rare unlike to what happens in
central Macedonia, the valley of Axios, around the Thermaicos gulf,
the Langadas basin and Chalkidike.

The top of the mound lies 82m absl. The mound measures 11m in
hight. It has a flat part, 1.950sq.m wide, on its top, while the lower
part measures up to 3.700sq.m.  The perimeter of the mound has been
disturbed by trenches created during World War I, when French and
English troops camped in the area so as to have a better control of
the passage that connects Central and Eastern Macedonia near the mouth
of Strymon river.

The systematic research in the field began in 2012 and continues to
this day, under the supervision of the Ephorate of Antiquities of
Kavala-Thasos and is supported financially by the Municipality of
Pangaion and the INSTAP (Institute of Aegean Prehistory). Excavation
has already revealed important features, such as architectural
remains, characteristic pottery of the Late Bronze Age, small
artefacts mainly connected to the household equipment and a rich
zooarchaeological material.  The architectural remains
(enclosure-apsidal building) unearthed till now, in the upper
archaeological layer, are dated in the last period of the Late Bronze
Age (LH IIIC/1200-1100B.C.), according to the characteristic pottery.

Ofrynio Toumba will allow an opportunity to study a settlement of the
Late Bronze Age in the coastal area of Eastern Macedonia, decisively
contributing to the enrichment of the archaeological record of the
area. The renewal of research perspective in this critical geographic
area, between the Aegean and Europe, give us the opportunity to
describe more accurately the various aspects of habitation patterns
and to understand better the social networks that existed in Northern
Greece and the Balkan peninsula.
