---
layout: abstract

title: "Neolithic Ceramic Lids from North Central Bulgaria"

author: "Ivan Suvandzhiev"

institution: "University of Veliko Turnovo “St. Cyril and St. Methodius”"

keywords: "Neolithic Ceramics, Lower Danube Valley, Pottery Analysis"
---

The lids are one of the seldom discovered types of vessels from the
Neolithic period, which comes to explain the lack of analyses of the
indicated category of ceramic assemblage. This study includes 29
fragments found at the settlements Samovodene, Hotnitsa-Orlovka,
Hotnitsa-Kaya bunar situated in the Yantra river valley, as well as
Koprivets which is located in the Rusenski Lom basin. The fragments
reveal changes in the typology and the variety of the decoration
through the entire Late Neolithic period (according to the Bulgarian
chronological system – 5500/5400-5000/4900 BC), namely the Hotnitsa,
Dudeşti and Vădastra cultures in the Lower Danube region. The absence
of any Boian-Bolentineanu traces is not surprising, considering its
vague specifics and even questionable existence.

Most of the forms used come from Samovodene (25 pieces), as it is one
of the few sites excavated to a greater extent. They belong to
cylindrical (with straight or bulging walls) and slightly conical
lids. The few sherds from the sites in the vicinity of Hotnitsa and
the single from Koprivets show different shapes, characteristic of the
very end of this stage. These fragments have rounded conical and
spherical profiles. Various ornaments are incrusted with white or on
rare occasions red paste.

The lids from North Central Bulgaria, as well as part of the ceramic
assemblage, find closest parallels in the Dudeşti and Vădastra
material from the Teleorman region, Southern Romania.