---
layout: abstract

title: "Spinning in the Central Balkans and the Rilo-Rhodope Area
        in the Context of the Social and Economic Transformations
        During the Final Chalcolithic"

author: "Ivan Kotsov"

institution: "Department of Prehistory, NIAM-BAS"

keywords: ""
---

The Final Chalcholithic covers the time after the end of the classical
stages of late chalcholithic culture complexes
Kodzhadermen-Gumelnitsa-Karanovo VI, Krivodol-Salkuta-Bubani, and
before the beginning of the protobronze cultures. This time is
characterized by drastic decline of the population in the plain lands
of the Eastern and increment of the settlements in the semi-mountain
and mountain zones of the Central Balkans and the Rilo-Rhodope
area. On the current stage, most of the researchers think that this
tendency was due to the climate changes that occurred in the end of
the fifth millennium BC. They led to the termination of the KGKIV
culture complex. KSB culture continued its existence but with a number
of changes in its material culture which indicated the transition to
the following protobronze cultures. They were part of complex
transformations that had been provoked by the intensive connections
between the Aegean, the Balkans and the Middle Danube.

The main reason for the intensification of the cultural contacts in
this time can be seen in the large-scale exchange of cooper that was
provoked by the metallurgic “boom” in the KSB area. The data for such
contacts is significant. However the South Balkans didn’t take part in
them. On the other hand there are lots of evidence about strong
connections between the last region, the Central Balkans and the
Rilo-Rhodope area. One of common features between them is the increase
in the quantity of the spindle-whorls and the appearance of a new type
– the so called “short conical” spindle-whorls. The appearance of the
new type can’t be explained only with a common “fashion” because the
form of the spindle-whorls is directly related to their function. So,
it can be concluded that there were partial changes in the spinning
technique and the spinning had increased its economic importance in
the whole commented area.

The spinning technique depends on the used materials. Big
spindle-whorls are suitable for spinning of long fiber raw materials
(flax), and the small – for short fiber materials (goat hair,
wool). In comparison with the most of the other Chalcolithic
spindle-whorls the “short conical” can be considered as small.

The increment of spinning’s economic importance and the use of similar
to the “short conical” spindle-whorls are also characteristic features
for the mobile stockbreeding Chernavoda I culture. The existence of
mobile pastoral groups in the Central Balkan chalcolithic cultures was
supposed long ago. So, it can be argued that the occurrence of the
“short conical” spindle-whorls indicates the use of animal fibers in
the textile production of those mobile pastoral groups.

The increment of spinning’s economic importance and the use of animal
fibers in it was a supra-regional process. In the end of the V and in
the IV millennium BC this was a characteristic feature for a wide
region, including the Near East, the Agean and the Balkans. This
process underlies the selection of the first “wooly” sheep and the
weaving of woolen textile.