---
layout: abstract

title: "A Sanctuary of Diana Totoithiana in the Territory of Nicopolis ad Istrum"

author: "Kalin Chakarov"

institution: "University of Veliko Turnovo “St.Cyril and
              St. Methodius”"

keywords: "Lower Moesia, Thrace, Nicopolis ad Istrum, Late Antonine
           period, Early Severan period, pediment, sanctuary, Diana
           Totoithiana"
---

In 2015 Museum of History Pavlikeni received Roman age stone monuments
from the cultural house at the village of Varbovka, Central North
Bulgaria. A short note in the study for the ancient remains in the
region of Pavlikeni, written by the archaeologist Bogdan Sultov, tells
us that there is a sanctuary of Artemis in the locality Bash bunar
(“The big well” from Turkish) near Varbovka. The architectural
elements were found during deep ploughing of the soil (between 50 and
90 cm). Later they were transported to the back yard of the cultural
house of Varbovka to be part of the local museum exhibition. The most
interesting among them is a left half of a pediment with Latin
inscription. It has elaborate decoration – there is a palmetto leaf
shaped acroterium at the left angle and other motifs. The most
important is the combination of lower part of spear and left half of
shield. A Latin inscription above the spear tells that the building is
a sanctuary (AEDEM – inflected form of aedes). Another part of the
inscription reveals the deity that was worshipped there was Diana with
her Thracian epithet Totoithiana:

		DIA
	AEDEM 	TO TO
		ITHI

The epithet has different variants and has been found mainly in
combination with deities as the Thracian Hero and Diana. Is seems that
this local name was common among the Thracians who lived in the Middle
Rossitsa river basin and to the north. Form Russlaya, a village about
40 km east from Varbovka was found a dedication to Diana Totobisia. In
the land of Karaisen, 30 km to the north, was found a dedication of a
Thracian person to Heroni Ithiostalae. Analogous to the epithet from
Varbovka is in a bilingual inscription for the Tracian Hero from
Svilengrad, Southeastern Bulgaria, where he was called
Totoithianus. According to scholars as Vladimir Georgiev, the epithet
would mean “The goddess that gives production/accouchement/nature” and
to Vassilka Gerassimova – “The love-giving goddess”.

Most probably the sanctuary near Varbovka was made at the end of the
Late Antonine or early Severan dynasty, because of its similarities to
examples as the pediment of the thermoperipathos of Nicopolis ad
Istrum, built in 184/185 in the time of Commodus. Depending of its
date it is one of the temples of Diana in the provinces Thracia or
Lower Moesia.
