---
layout: abstract

title: "La Tène Pottery Kiln with Double S-Lyre Stamped Pottery from
        Transylvania"

author: "Malvinka Urák"

institution: "Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca"

keywords: "Middle La Tène, Rescue Excavation, Pottery Kiln,
           Double-Lyre Stamp"
---

For different reasons, during the last decades, the research of the La
Tène cemeteries received more interest in comparison with the
habitational sites of the same period. This trend still persist in the
analyzed region. The chance of the settlements lies in the
archaeological investigations involved by the construction of the
highways. In this way the so formed gaps can be gradually filled.

The presented finds were unearthed during the framework of the A3
motorway excavation crossing the Transylvanian Basin. The site is
located in the Middle Mures Region, on a plateau situated in one of
the many guts of the river, with an approximative height of 20 meters
above the lowland. The small number of archaeological features, dated
to the middle phase of the La Tène, consist of two kilns and a sunken
house. One of the kilns were heavily affected by the agricultural
work, therefore we have no solid base to make statement about its
original shape and dimensions. The better preserved one belongs to the
bi-chambered updraught kiln-type. Its specialty lies in the fact that
both of the flues are formed by stone slabs, material used also to
reinforce the walls from the exterior side. The garment accessories
and pottery fragments unearthed in the dwelling are serving a good
chronological frame for the habitational phase. Another interesting
aspect is the presence of the double S-Lyre stamped pottery, observed
both in the dwelling and the pottery kiln. With 1,5 km eastern from
this potter site another dwelling has been unearthed, where the
afore-mentioned type of decorated pottery was also observed, proving
the distribution of the locally manufactured pottery.

The type of kilns in discussion are one of those useful inventions of
the Celts which were adopted and used for many decades later, not only
by the Romans, but also the Gepidic and Avar population. The success
of this kiln-type lies in its structure, which makes possible to
control the quality and duration of firing, resulting in a uniform,
high-quality vessel. Such kilns are well know in Western Europe and
the neighboring areas, but until now, our discovery is the only one
found and investigated in the Transylvanian Basin. Nevertheless, the
situation must be the result of the current stage of the
investigation, and hopefully the forthcoming unearthings and
investigations will bring to light more finds.
