---
layout: abstract

title: "Some New Aspects of Settlement Dynamics During the Iron Age
        in North-Western Balkans (Continental Croatia)"

author: "Marta Rakvin"

institution: "University of Zagreb"

keywords: "Hillfort Settlement, Early to Late Iron Age Transition,
           Kaptol-Gradci, Croatia, Geophysical Survey, LiDAR,
           Multidisciplinary Approach"

session_id: "18ma"

timeslot: "09.30 - 10.00"
---

The site Kaptol located in Požega valley, in present day continental
Croatia, has been recognized as the pivotal Early Iron Age centre
located on the southern brims of the Hallstatt cultural circle, since
the second half of the 1960’s of the 20th century, as well as the
eponymous site for the Martijanec-Kaptol cultural group. The site is
mainly known for its rich burials with elaborated tumuli structures
and the complex funerary practices of its community.

In recent years, four excavation campaigns have been undertaken on the
hillfort settlement of Kaptol-Gradci, adjacent to the tumuli
graveyard. The settlement is situated on a strategically favourable
position dominating the surrounding area. The preliminary results,
based on the material cultural remains, have yielded new and very
important insights concerning the Early Iron Age to the Late Iron Age
transition period.

When taking into account the present state of research concerning the
end of the Early Iron Age and the transition to the Late Iron Age
period in north-western Balkans, the lack of systematic research and
all-encompassing data about the communities that were inhabiting the
aforementioned area becomes evident. Many questions regarding inner
settlement organisation, settlement distribution and communication
networks still remain open. As the sole viable results come from old,
small scale or salvage excavation campaigns, which, because of their
limited nature, are just capable of giving highly particularized and
incomplete datasets, only an impaired image of these communities can
be achieved.

Furthermore, a multidisciplinary approach has been used during the
course of the settlement research. A series of systematic geophysical
surveys has been conducted on the hillfort. They have shown elaborate
structures existing beneath the ground surface, indicating strong
activity on the whole settlement perimeter and existence of a centre
of considerable economic strength.

On a larger scale, a LiDAR scanning of the heavily forested area
around the settlement allowed a wider area to be surveyed in order to
find other associated archaeological features.

So far, a presence of a transitional horizon between late Hallstatt
and the Early La Tène period on the hillfort has been revealed, the
course of which is the subject of my ongoing research. Further goals
include conducting a typological and chronological analysis of the
material remains from the hillfort, contextualizing them and
correlating the community living in Kaptol with other communities
belonging to the same period, thus finding a place for Kaptol-Gradci
hillfort on the communication networks map at the end of the Early
Iron and the beginning of the Late Iron Age.
