---
layout: abstract

title: "Middle Copper Age Settlement Organization in Eastern Croatia"

author: "Mateja Hulina, Hrvoje Kalafatić"

institution: "Institute of Archaeology, Zagreb"

keywords: "Lasinja Culture, Furchenstich, Retz-Gajary Culture,
           Houses, Settlement"

session_id: "19mp"

timeslot: "09.00 - 09.30"
---

This research aims to contribute to the knowledge of middle Copper Age
settlement organization in Eastern Croatia. The period covers the time
from the end of the 5th to mid of the 4th millenium BC and is
characterised by two cultures - Lasinja and Retz-Gajary.

We are going to use two sites as examples of Middle Copper Age
settlements - Čepinski Martinci Dubrava, with Lasinja, Furchenstich
and Retz-Gajary finds and Čeminac Vakanjac, with only Retz-Gajary
finds.

Lasinja culture settlement in Čepinski Martinci Dubrava is situated on
a slightly elevated plateau and has rows of above-ground houses. They
are orientated in east-west direction, have a rectangular ground-plan,
they are longer than 15 metres and generally have more rooms. The
largest among them had a porch. All large houses had a partly buried
rectangular building to their south, which, based on the discovery of
large ceramic vessels, probably served as food storages. In the
vicinity of the houses, several round pits with cult burials of human
skulls on the bottom were excavated.

A second type of house was also discovered. They are square with 11
metre-long sides, central supporting pillars, and entrances from the
south-east, and the same orientation as the rectangular houses. These
houses likely had a four-sided roof. This part of the settlement can
probably be dated to the post Lasinja Furchenstich horizon.

Retz-Gajary culture settlement in Čeminac-Vakanjac is situated on a
slightly elevated part of the site and consists of several large and
many smaller pits that are often grouped. Two of the largest features,
the large pit dwellings, are 12x9 and 12x7 metres in size and have the
most abundant finds. They are surounded with various smaller pits that
could be used for daily activities or as storages, while large pit
dwelling were probably used as houses. In one of the pits a human
skull and parts of skeletal remains were found.

Both settlements have numerous analogies from the same time periods in
south Carpathian basin and cental Europe.
