---
layout: abstract

title: "Over the hills and far away: Reassessing the <sup>14</sup>C
        chronological frameworks of the 5th Millennium BC
        between Iran and Southeastern Europe"

author: "Mehmet Karaucak"

institution: "German Archaeological Institute, Eurasia Division"

keywords: "<sup>14</sup>C, Copper Age, Chalcolithic, Innovation,
           Metallurgy, Social Change"
---

5th Millennium BC is a period of key innovations, that have set the
stage for broad social change, such as the emergence of complex
societies, long distance exchange networks, as well as the rise of
urban centers and the first states in the Near East during the
following millennia. Among the technological innovations of the 5th
Millennium BC, metal working is of critical importance, due to its far
reaching consequences in the social domain. Although, recent studies
suggest an earlier dating for the beginnings of extractive metallurgy,
within the last centuries of the 6th Millennium BC; increasing
frequency of metal finds, together with an expansion of metallurgical
knowledge and practices (for instance the diversification of metal
objects, application of new raw materials, and alloying), imply a
rapid development during the 5th Millennium BC, which runs parallel to
the integration of metallurgy into the wider social and economic
contexts.

While there has been a significant number of studies that focus on the
development of early metallurgy in the Near East, Anatolia or
Southeastern Europe separately, an attempt to provide an overview of
the subject on supra-regional level had been missing. A crucial step
towards the holistic study of the 5th Millennium BC metallurgy, is the
integration of chronological frameworks and synchronization of
material assemblages over a large area. In this paper I will try to
provide an outline of the existing <sup>14</sup>C data from excavated sites
located between the Kerman Range in Iran to the Morava River in
Serbia. All raw dates in the dataset will be re-calibrated using the
IntCal13 atmospheric curve in order to obtain standardized and
comparable results. The results will be grouped according to the
material assemblages that they are associated with, and the
chronological implications will be discussed.
