---
layout: abstract

title: "Fish or Cut Bait. Methodological Aspects Regarding the Study
        of Late Neolithic â€“ Chalcolithic Fishing Implements from the
        Lower Danube Region"

author: "Mihaela Savu"

institution: "Christian Albrechts University of Kiel"

keywords: "Late Neolithic, Chalcolithic, Lower Danube Region, Fishing
           Equipment, Research Methodology"

session_id: "17a"

timeslot: "16.30 - 17.00"
---

The Late Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlements in the Lower Danube
region have constituted the focus of archaeologists for more than a
century now. However, fishing failed to individualize as an obvious
practice.

For the Late Neolithic period in the Lower Danube region the intensive
agricultural practices and animal breeding were providing the
necessary nutritional shares, whilst wild game and fish continued to
represent important sources in their turn, with an increasing
relevance in the following period. But while this image may or may be
not representative for the entire area under discussion, an obvious
fact, valid not only for the Lower Danube region, but for SE Europe,
is that little attention was awarded to the investigation of fishing.

The information regarding the fishing implements is even scarcer,
though it is admitted that the exploitation of water faunal resources
requires knowledge of fauna behavior, an understanding of the
environment and the usage of more or less specialized instruments. For
the Lower Danube this perspective is at least partly reflected by the
lots of aquatic faunal remains, varying in size from one site to
another, and exhibiting a wide range of species of different sizes,
coming from both marine and sweet water sources. Along with the
archaeozoological material, various implements, made on different
supports (wood, fibers, osseous material, copper, stone, ceramic),
depending on period, resources and purpose indirectly confirm the
practice of fishing. But the assignment of these tools to the practice
of fishing was often done ad-hoc or based on ethnographic references,
with only more recent integrated approaches, combining multiple
analytical methods (technological, use-wear, residue etc.). Most of
the previous works on this area and time-frame dealt mainly with
publishing artifacts, among which complete hooks or harpoons were the
most preferred ones, thus a clear overview of the number and
morphology, materials and contexts of finds, still being an
issue. Same goes when it comes to integrating the ichthyological
material into dietary analyses, where only few studies covered this
sector, on a minor scale.

Hence, the aim is to fill as many of the missing gaps, and obtain a
more accurate view on the importance fishing had as a distinctive
practice within the Late Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlements from
the Lower Danube region.The first step,and the purpose of this paper,
is to come up with a more appropriate methodology, involving multiple
sets of data. Starting with the physical characteristics of the
artifacts and their spatial distribution within the sites, one of the
main inquiries remains still which of the artifacts previously
assigned as fishing equipment were used according to that
assumption. The study will, therefore, explore the ways this kind of
information can be obtained as well as on the manners it can
afterwards be integrated in the larger, unitary topic of fishing on
the Lower Danube region, during the 5th millennium B.C.