---
layout: abstract

title: "Comparing Different Models of Complex Settlements in
        Western Anatolia and Southeast Europe During the 3rd
        Millennium BC: The Question of Urbanization"

author: "Nihan Büyükakmanlar Naiboğlu"

institution: "University of Istanbul"

keywords: "3rd Millennium BC, Trade Networks,
           Social Differentiation, Urbanization"
---

The 3rd millennium BC has witnessed one of the most dynamic
intercultural networks in prehistory. It is the time when the first
urban civilizations of the Old World – the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and
Harappan – have been established and a systematic long-distance trade
has been created across an area stretching from India in the east to
the Aegean and Thrace in the west.

This dynamic network arose through the intentional participation and
cooperation of different cultures rather than an expansion or
colonization of one single dominant culture. One of the most crucial
effects of this network in Western Anatolia, the Aegean and Thrace can
be seen in the re-definition of the social hierarchy in those
regions. The circulation of ideas and products has influenced the way
how the social asymmetries were expressed between the different
classes of society without eliminating the local characteristics of
the respective cultures. It is the first time in those regions that a
higher social class differentiated itself from the rest of the society
through the medium of settlement planning: Monumental architecture in
form of communal buildings and defensive structures appeared, many
settlements got divided into an upper and a lower town to underline
the social positions, specialized craftsmen seem to have monopolized
the exploitation as well as the production of specific resources and
goods, and trade with distant regions became more and more a vital
concern for the existence of settlements.

Tell settlements, established on trade routes, developed their own way
of complexity and evolved into regional centers with some urban
character. Bademağacı and Seyitömer in Western Central Anatolia, Troy
and Liman Tepe on the Anatolian Aegean coast, Thermi on Lesbos, and
Yunatsite in Thrace are some of the best examples of this process
during the 3rd millennium BC.

Both the social and the material effects of this network weaken in the
northwest direction, to finally vanish to the west of the Thracian
Plain. There again appears a quite different cultural zone, stretching
from northern Greece in the south to the Carpathian Basin and the
Danube in the north, a zone which was closely connected in itself, but
seemed to avoid any systematicinteraction with the neighboring Aegean
and Anatolia. Despite the fact that only a few cultural elements can
be seen in the archaeological records of the vast area of the Western
Balkans, one can generally observe the ignorance towards the
southeastern innovations. The rural character and material findings of
Sitagroi in Greek Macedonia, only a few kilometers inland from the
Aegean, show how striking the differences between neighboring regions
could be. There is no sign of a social differentiation through housing
in Western Balkans, not even on the Carpathian tells with an enclosure
at the end of the 3rd millennium BC.

There are some innovations, though, which emphasize an indirect
cultural connection between the Western Balkans and the
Aegeo-Anatolian region. Drinking feasts as a symbol of prestige,
became a distinctive aspect of elite behavior at the end of the 4 th
millennium BC. Drinking equipment of different kinds spread in a
relatively short period of time during the 3rd millennium BC
throughout the whole area from Mesopotamia and Levant in the east to
entire Europe in the west. The Balkan populations were clearly
attracted by the elite behavior of their southeastern neighbors, but
showed – with the exception of Thrace – absolutely no interest in
changing their lifestyle or settlement organization. To conclude, this
research deals with the different urban features of Anatolia and the
Aegean and aims to find out to what extent they have reached the
Balkans.
