---
layout: abstract

title: "To Be or Not to Be… Buried in а Ditch? Or About the Burials
        and Human Remains from Neolithic Ditches"

author: "Nikolina Nikolova"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Early Neolithic, Thrace, Ditches, Enclosures, Burials, Funerary Practices"

session_id: "17a"

timeslot: "15.30 - 16.00"
---

Prehistory funerary practices were always central to the Archaeology
maybe due to the fact that the death is inseparable of life and
humans’ life is the essence of the science of the past. For the
Neolithic period, before the separation of the dead from the living
ones in the set necropolises, many writings are devoted to the
description and interpretation of the intramural burials. Some
scholars believe that the inhumations within the settlement’s
boundaries represent the usual way of how people had been
buried. Others argue that these intramural burials are occasional and
are result of accidental circumstances. They keep asking themselves
where the ‘ordinary’ burials are as those found inside the
settlements’ area are just a really small percentage of the
inhabitants.

This paper aims to present and discuss a different type of burials,
being ordinary or not, revealed within the Early Neolithic ditches in
Thrace, Northern Greece and Anatolia with a focus set on the Bulgarian
lands. The perception of ditched enclosures as places where complex
practices involving funerary procedures were performed during Recent
Prehistory is an old issue in European archaeology, but a relatively
recent one for the Balkans, namely in the South. This is due mainly to
the circumstance that ditched enclosures only recently started to be
detected in their real archaeological expression – in the last 5 to 10
years.

The large numbers of human bones from the Neolithic enclosed sites in
Central and Western Europe (Lengyel Culture, LBK Culture, Noyen
Culture, Windmill Hill Culture, etc.), and the special treatment
afforded to them must be attributed with significance in considering
the function of the sites. There is evidence that some complete bodies
were buried on these sites, while some bodies were affected by
recuttings which led to parts of them being removed. It is also
possible that the bodies were originally laid in the ditch systems and
were later exhumed, perhaps with the purpose with the redepositing
them elsewhere. Hearths in the ditches are evidence that open fires
were lit within them and may indicate that human bodies or bones were
burnt inside the ditches or a specific rituals had taken part there.

Many of the enclosed sites in south-eastern Europe may appear to be
different from those of north-western Europe as they have traces of
settlements or villages in the interior. These sites, however, also
have evidence of activities in their enclosure systems and in features
in the interior which match those that were undertaken on the sites in
north-western Europe. Similar funeral activities were therefor
probably also carried out of some of these ‘enclosed villages’.

We should maybe consider that the burials in the ditches could
actually be the ‘normal’ or ‘usual’ ones rather than exceptions.
