---
layout: abstract

title: "Burnt Structures from the Rousse Settlement Mound"

author: "Rumyana Yordanova"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Rousse Settlement Mound, Burnt Houses, Complexes, Vessels"
---

Closed complexes define every archaeological site since they deliver
direct information about the everyday life of the prehistoric society
at a certain place. For tell-sites the opportunity for reconstructing
the past on the base of closed complexes is even better. Burnt houses
are the best example. Following the settlement sequence, they can show
differences in architecture plans, building techniques, pottery
development, the distributions of various kinds of goods and so
on. For that purpose, however, the crucial points are detailed
documentation of the fieldwork and precise study of the archaeological
material afterwards followed by complete publication. Unfortunately,
there is scarcity of that kind of information for the late Eneolithic
settlements in Bulgaria. In publications most of the archaeologists
include only general results of their excavations without further
details for certain features.

One of the bad examples is the Rousse settlement mound. The
excavations on the site have a long and uneasy history. As a result of
the four main archaeological campaigns (conducted in the period
1904-1990, with decades of breaks in-between) the site was completely
excavated. Different goals and methodology applied in every campaign
have caused lots of problems. A large amount of finds has been
gathered but only in publications for the 1949-1953 campaign the finds
are connected to a certain house.

The current study is an attempt for identifying burnt structures from
the Rousse settlement mound and their ceramic complexes from the last
campaign. It is achieved by comparing data for burnt house remains
with presence of secondary burnt vessels on the same location. The
study is focused on the 1986-1990 campaign since official
documentation is available only for these years. Its main goal was the
complete examination of the site whose height was 3.60 m at this
point. Certain mistakes in fieldwork led to the mix-up of materials
from different layers. More than 300 complete and restorable vessels
were found but without context. Applying the mentioned secondary
analysis, some of the field mistakes could be repaired and the vessels
could finally find their places in the history of the Rousse
settlement mound.
