---
layout: abstract

title: "Povelyanovo: a Site of the Varna Culture"

author: "Stanimir Parvanov"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Povelyanovo, Varna Lakes Region, Late Eneolithic Pottery,
           Varna Culture"
---

The Povelyanovo site was found during construction works in April
1970. It is located on the northwestern coast of the Beloslav
lake. The site wasn`t examined by archaeological excavations and the
only known material comes from the dredging works. This makes the
material non-stratified, without any data usable for analysis
stratigraphic. According to the company which completed the dredging,
materials were found in a territory of about 200 m length. The
cultural layer begins from a 2 m below the today water surface and
ends at 6,50 m. The materials are dated in Late Eneolithic and Early
Bronze Age.

There is only one known short notice about the site, with no material
published. It can be defined as a settlement, because together with
the pottery, wooden posts and tools from various raw materials are
found. A problem occurs with the demarcation of the materials, because
except the pottery, the tools can be dated back to either Late
Eneolithic or Early Bronze Age, because of their close technological
characteristics. That is why, the only surely Eneolithic material is
the pottery. There are 143 sherds collected from the settlement, which
were stored in the collection of Varna Archaeological Museum and have
not been handled or published until now. The pottery is highly
fragmented and only two intact profiles of vessels are known. Still,
its amount allows technological, typological and ornamentation
analyses, which shows full similarity with the known pottery of the
other Eneolithic sites from the Varna lakes area. Their chronological
position is phase II of Varna Culture, which easily can be applied to
Povelyanovo settlement also. However, there are some features, which
could define some of the examples in earlier stage of the development
of the Culture.

Other problem, which needs to be reviewed, is if this is a separate
settlement or is part of the known Devnia settlement, which is located
close to it and was archaeologically excavated in 1969.
