---
layout: abstract

title: "Roman Ceramic Centre Near the Village of Karavelovo,
        Shumen Municipality: Typology and Chronology of
        the Red Slip Pottery Production"

author: "Stiliyan Ivanov"

institution: "University of Veliko Turnovo “St.Cyril and St. Methodius”"

keywords: ""
---

The archaeological site near the village of Karavelovo, Shumen
district, was discovered by chance in the 1970s, during construction
work. In the course of the excavations a large centre for ceramic
production was uncovered, located on a slope facing the north, in the
Kazan čeir locality. The site was reported as found in the vicinities
of the village of Pet mogili, although it falls into the territory of
the village of Karavelovo.

As a result of the rescue and regular excavations on the site eleven
pottery kilns were discovered, together with large amount of whole and
fragmented ceramic vessels, including production waste. Until now
these finds were only briefly and partly mentioned in archaeological
reports and one short article.

Red slip wares (90%) and coarse grey wares (10%) were the two major
items in the centre’s assortment. The aim of the present study is to
clarify the chronology of the red slipped part of the pottery from the
site. The presented functional categorization and typological
classification are based on the finds of such vessels during the
excavations.

According to their function, the red slipped items from the site could
be classified as table wares, storage vessels and vessels with
specific purpose. The table wares include dishes, bowls, cups, jugs
and table amphoras, while the storage vessels comprise only pots. The
last functional category of red slipped pottery covers sifters and
stoppers.

The presented typology is based on the form and decoration of the
vessels. The types are classified according to their form, while the
variants are distinguished by the presence or absence of specific kind
of decoration. More than forty previously unpublished examples of the
production of the centre near Karavelovo are included in this study.

According to the published data, the kilns from the site were in
operation from the 2nd to the 4th centuries AD. However, the lack of
detailed analysis of the finds makes this dating uncertain. The study
of the ceramic assemblage points towards a more restricted
chronological period – from the end of the 2nd or the beginning of the
3rd to the mid- 3rd c. AD. The two coins of Caracalla and Caracalla
with Julia Domna, found inside the stoking pit of kiln 8, correspond
to the pottery dating.

The described assemblage of whole and fragmented vessels can be
attributed to the Roman provincial pottery, typical for the time
between the end of the 2nd c. and the middle of the 3rd c. AD. It
represents the local style developed by the potters in this part of
Moesia Inferior under the influence of the itinerant craftsmen and
brings new and important data for the manufacture and distribution of
ceramic items in the province.
