---
layout: abstract

title: "Amber in the Mycenaean World and in the Balkan Peninsula During
        the 2nd Millennium B.C: Perspectives of an Imported Material"

author: "Theodoros Zygouris"

institution: "Greek Ministry of Education"

keywords: "Amber, Bronze Age, Commodities, Value"
---

This presentation examines the current state of research on
prehistoric amber in the Balkans. Although there is a significant
amount of publishing on amber artefacts concerning Greece and the
Mycenaean World, a coherent narrative related to the material’s
importance in Southeastern Europe has not been proposed yet.

Amber, mostly succinite, i.e. of Baltic geological provenience, is
imported in southern Balkans, in Peloponnese, in the 17th/16th
c. BC. It takes almost two centuries until amber appears gradually in
the North, in Serbia, in Bosnia-Herzegovina, in Slovenia, in Romania,
in Bulgaria and in Albania; nevertheless, the Peninsula artefacts are
of similar typology -flattened globular, biconical and discoid beads-
with rare exceptions for almost four centuries. Amber beads’ typology
changes after the 12th c. BC and different shapes come to light in
Southeastern Europe following patterns already largely observed in the
Mediterranean World. The typological renewal of beads attests to a new
crafting, trading and exchanging reality from that period onwards. In
any case, the amber beads are mostly used to form necklaces, to adorn
dresses or belts or to be strung as pendants.

Most find places are burials. Non-burial sites are significantly
fewer, probably due to archaeological preservation reasons: in
storehouses in the Mycenaean palaces in Greece, in a Bulgarian ritual
hoard and in Late Bronze Age Romanian hoards and caves.

Moreover, Mycenaeans seem to have played a decisive role in amber’s
circulation not only in Italy and in East Mediterranean regions, as it
has been already substantiated, but also in –at least- the Western
Balkans. The Mycenaean supremacy retreated after the 12th c. BC
turmoil in the East.

Amber has been valued as a distinctive material in the
Balkans. Amber’s geographical distribution marks out certain
restrictions concerning its possession and its use in the Peninsula
and indicates the material’s importance. Furthermore, multivalent
aspects should be ascribed to amber: it could have been perceived as a
post-mortem symbol, a power insignium or an object activated in social
emulation/competition policies within local communities depending on
the place and on the period.

Nevertheless, as far as the Balkan archaeology is concerned, amber
does not seem to have been researched interpretatively. Although amber
study offers a fertile field of consideration related to identity and
societal issues, the fossilized resin has been mostly viewed under a
cultural-historical aspect and not in context.

Finally, it should be stressed that modern history and contemporary
politics have influenced the research options on amber in the
Balkans. After the II World War emphasis has been laid on Mycenaean
finds in “Western” Greece and discoveries in ex “Eastern bloc”
countries have been largely ignored even due to language/publishing
barriers. Thus, an intra-Balkan cooperation is vital for a
comprehensive analysis of the imported material.
