---
layout: abstract

title: "Munificence and Romanization Process of Liburnia"

author: "Valentina ZoviÄ‡"

institution: "University of Zadar"

keywords: "Munificence, Romanization, Liburnia, Epigraphy"
---

In Roman Liburnia, as well as in other parts of Roman Empire, were
often built various public objects financed by wealthy individuals,
municipal aristocracy or emperors. The choice of what to build, where,
when, and how to pay for these buildings was a question of available
financial resources and current needs of the local communities. The
construction of these public objects was an occasion to climb up the
ladder of political popularity as well, so individuals who wanted to
become more influential and get certain political function usually
decided to invest in some public work for the benefit of the
community. This could be the construction or renovation of public
baths, temple, water supply system or some other necessary town
infrastructure. Romanization as process of acculturation, integration
and assimilation of newly incorporated populations in Roman Empire,
together with creation of Roman coloniae and municipia, had
significant role in political and social life of Liburnia and it can
be assumed that one of the ways to promote newly arrived Roman culture
was to invest in public buildings.

On the territory of Roman Liburnia we have certain number of
epigraphic evidences and archaeological remains which confirm presence
of significant public works provided and financed by wealthy
individuals. So the aim of this paper is to present and explain the
relations between munificence and process of Romanization on that
territory in order to show and explain how big impact munificence had
on that process and did really investing in public benefactions
brought benefactors wanted prestige and political functions.
