---
layout: abstract

title: "Clay Sources and Paste Recipes of Gumelnitsa Pottery from Romania"

author: "Vasile Opris"

institution: "Vasile PÃ¢rvan Institute of Archaeology,
              Bucharest Municipal Museum"
---

The pottery of Gumelnitsa culture (4550-3900 B.C.) was first studied
at the beginning of the 20th century. From then until now a plenty of
digging reports, scientific articles and books comprised detailed
descriptions and observations about stylistic and typological features
of pottery. Technological questions regarding the paste analysis were
more often issued in the last decades and the methods used varied from
archaeological approaches made macroscopically to laboratory analyses
performed by specialists in geology, chemistry or physics.

The aim of this paper is to present and analyze the paste of
Gumelnitsa pottery discovered in several sites from Romania, also
representing a middle stage of my doctoral research, while the final
target is to have an overlook on Gumelnitsa pottery paste technology
on both sides of the Danube. Old and new data was gathered from
numerous publications about Gumelnitsa sites raging in space from the
Olt River to the Black Sea. This approach will first analyze the
pottery at the level of the settlement presenting some case studies of
sites (Bordusani, Harsova, Pietrele, Sultana Malu-Rosu) where both
macroscopically and laboratory observations on pottery were
published. Secondly, this data will be combined with sparse
information about paste quality collected from various digging reports
and using a GIS program, maps will be created, showing the variability
of pottery paste recipes in time and space.