---
layout: abstract

title: "Hellenistic Bronze Pitcher from the Village of Tazha in the
        Context of Thracian Toreutics"

author: "Vladislav Zhivkov"

institution: "NIAM-BAS"

keywords: "Hellenistic Age, Bronze Pitcher, Thracian Toreutics,
           Repoussé Embossing"
---

During the past century there have been a lot of discussions regarding
the toreutics in ancient Thrace. For quite a long time, one curious
item is left aside from the works of scholars. In 1934, a pitcher was
found around the region of nowadays village of Tazha, Kazanlak
municipality (probably from destroyed burial mound). An article was
published in the bulletin of Bulgarian archaeological institute and
commented briefly several times later, but even today, it still lacks
substantial publication. The item bears clear local manufacture and
most fascinating - it’s made out of copper alloy. Although vastly
damaged, from one to seven equal zoomorphic ornaments from three
different types are preserved, positioned in the horizontal rows. They
are all embossed, worked in repoussé technique using a stamp, outlined
and several details are added by free hand afterwards. On the bottom
row, there is a single image of a fish and just above it, there are
seven birds, probably ducks. Most interesting are partly preserved
bull heads, ornaments known from many metalworking tools, especially
in North West Bulgaria, but attested on much fewer known Thracian
toreutics.

This study aims to propose a certain date for the pitcher and
determine its role in Hellenistic Thracian culture. The development of
the three different ornaments can be followed throughout the second
half of I millennium BC and a probable connection with similar items
is proposed. The closest geographically and chronologically parallel –
a silver pectoral from the region of Stara Zagora puts forth the
question about the localization of a workshop, or a group of closely
related workshops (which use similar tools), working on different
types of items and materials, but with similar decoration in this
region. A cultural continuity can be observed with later Hellenistic
products from the northern regions, where more stylized ox heads and
birds can be observed in local mould made pottery in II-I c. BC.
