---
layout: abstract

title: "Bulgars, Slavs, Avars. On the Early Medieval Necropolises
        in Northwestern Bulgaria and the Population That Used Them"

author: "Vladimir Staykov"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Early Middle Age, Necropolises, Northwestern Bulgaria,
           Christianization, Slavs, Avars, Ethnical Identification"
---

The subject of research are a group of necropolises, most of them
located in present-day Northwestern Bulgaria, characterized with the
presence of two burial rituals - inhumations with head in western
direction and grave goods and urn cremations. The two thoroughly
excavated sites from this group are near the villages of Galiche and
Dolni Lukovit, which makes them the center of attention. There are
some very intriguing problems about this group of necropolises -
whether the graves with both rituals are part of one cemetery, or they
originate from two separate sites, whether the inhumations are an
evidence of christianization, as proposed by their researcher Zhivka
Vazharova more than 40 years ago, and what are the characteristics of
the people, used these cemeteries from the 8th to the 11th
century. The eight sites, included in the group by Vazharova are
reviewed in details, with attention given to the ritual, grave type,
grave goods and inventory. An interesting pattern can be observed -
almost 100% of the grave goods are found in graves, where the dead is
in supine position, while in the graves, where the dead has one or two
crouching hands, the only inventory are jewelry found on their natural
places. This, combined with the plans of the sites shows spatial
differentiation between the two types of inhumation - those in supine
position with goods (Type A) take the central parts of the cemeteries,
while the ones with crouching hands and without grave goods (Type B)
are located outside "the core". Study on the inventory itself and the
dating finds shows another pattern - the jewelry and clothes ornaments
from the Type A graves and the graves with cremations are dated mainly
in 8th-9th c., while those from Type B graves firstly appear at the
end of 9th c. and later. The logical conclusion would be, that the
necropolises of this group have two phases of use - a pagan phase,
characterized with the Type A graves, and christian, where the Type B
graves belong.

The other main question is about the place those cemeteries and the
population using them take in the whole picture on Middle and Lower
Danube in the Early Middle Age. In search of solution, a number of
necropolises are reviewed, located it present-day Bulgaria, Serbia,
Romania, Hungary. All those sites are thoroughly compared with the
Galiche-Dolni Lukovit type. The analysis shows some differences with
the other synchronous types of necropolises, for instance the biritual
ones from Northeastern Bulgaria, the slavic cemeteries with
cremations, the christian burials etc. Common elements are observed
with the rituals of the avar population from present-day Serbia,
Romania and Hungary, but those are not enough to identify the people,
used Galiche-Dolni Lukovit necropolises as avars. Most probably those
are local groups of population, showing common traits with the bulgars
in east, as well as the slavs and the avars in northwest. The more
specific cultural or ethnic identification should be an object of
future studies.
