---
layout: abstract

title: "The Crescent-Shaped Pectorals from Thrace, 5th Century BC:
        Origin and Distribution"

author: "Desislava Lyubenova"

institution: "NIAM-BAS"

keywords: "Crescent-Shaped Pectorals, Ancient Thrace, Asia Minor,
           Scythia"

session_id: "18ma"

timeslot: "10.00 - 10.30"
---

This study is focused on the origin, development and distribution of
the crescent-shaped and semicircular form of pectorals, widely spread
on the territory of Asia Minor, ancient Thrace, Scythia and single
examples from ancient Macedonia and Etruria.

The crescent-shaped pectorals on the territory of Thrace are presented
only of two examplе – Golyamata mound, from the necropolis of Duvanli,
Plovdiv region and Yakimova mound, near the village Krushare, Sliven,
from the middle of the 5th century BC. Both pectorals are made of gold
plate. Later this form passes or is replaced by the semicircular
pectorals, that are found in the graves from Bashova mound, from the
necropolis of Duvanli, burial mound near the village Dalboki, Stara
Zagora and Tumulus no. 1, near Chernozem, Kaloyanovo, from the second
half or the end of the 5th century BC. These pectorals are also made
of gold plate. This small group of crescent-shaped and semicircular
pectorals are found in graves together with weaponry (probably graves
of warriors) in the Odrysian territories and can be defined as a part
of ceremonial armor in Thrace. In two cases they were placed direct on
the cuirasses (Dalboki and Bashova mound). The similarities in their
forms suggest that they are influenced by a common
prototype. Iv. Venedikov is the first one that traces possible
influences and connections between Thracian pectorals and that of Asia
Minor. Eastern influences can be presented not only in shape but also
in the mode of decoration of above-mentioned objects.

The origin and development of crescent-shaped pectorals is very well
attested in different parts of Asia Minor. They are made of gold,
silver or bronze plates. The main part of crescent-shaped or
semicircular pectorals comes from the territory of Urartu, dated in
8th –7th century BC. Such items were also depicted on bronze figurines
of humans and mythological creatures. At the same time are dated the
pectorals from the territory of Etruria, which are probably influenced
by some eastern motifs. Pectorals from Assyria are rare, and according
to the researches, they may be also associated with the culture of
Urartu. Probably the crescent-shaped pectorals are accepted in the
territory of Scythia no later than the second half of the 7th century
BC, due to some earlier contacts with different parts of Asia Minor,
and are used to the 4th century BC. It is interesting to note that
part of these pectorals are also found in graves of warriors. On the
territory of ancient Macedonia there is only one example of
crescent-shaped or semicircular form – the gold pectoral from
Trebenishte, from the second half of 6th century BC.

Tracing the origin of crescent-shaped pectorals, their distribution in
different parts of the ancient world and most of all their context,
would allow to clarify the semantic of these plates, as well as
possible influences between them.