---
layout: abstract

title: "Medieval Stone-Lined/Cist Graves from the Bulgarian Lower
        Danube: Proliferation, Date, Supraregional Context"

author: "Dzhenyo Dzhenev"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Medieval, Cemeteries, Stone-Lined/Cist Graves, Danube, Bulgaria"

session_id: "19ma"

timeslot: "10.45 - 11.15"
---

Medieval cemeteries have since time immemorial in archaeological
scholarship been used primarily as a study tool for ethnic composition
of a certain area and materialization of ethnographic idiosyncrasies
in order to bridge the gap in ethnic history between the Middle Ages
and the Early Modern era.

But, since the Medieval period is also a time of intensive political,
economic, religious and cultural contacts, it should not come as a
surprise when certain phenomena appear as commonplace, as if
underpinning the grand cultural milieu of Medieval Europe.

The cist burials certainly fall into the aforementioned group as they
become ubiquitous in the High Medieval Period (c. 9-12 cent.), but are
still far behind the plain simple pits in term of numbers. Their
dramatic escalation in numbers, observed from the separate settlement
to the pan-European level in the period mentioned above, certainly
poses various problems about the importance and meaning of this
specific element of the burial custom.

For the purpose of this paper certain adjustments to the concept of
the cist grave should be considered, i.e. the decisive property in
distinguishing the graves shall be the surrounding of the pit with
stone slabs or even the crudest of masonry forming a faux-sarcophagus
of sorts containing the mortal remains of the deceased. Flooring shall
be considered of less importance to the general concept and the
surviving of lintels (“cover stones” or “lids”) is in practice too
dependent on post-burial disturbances (agriculture, grave-plundering
etc).

Taking the territory of present-day Northern Bulgaria (delimited by
the main ridge of the Balkan mountains, the Danube and the Black Sea
shore) as the main focus of research, the paper will comment on the
diachronic development of the grave type and its territorial
proliferation whilst inevitably considering the methodological hurdles
posed by the uneven state of research in the sub-regions of the
Bulgarian Lower Danube. By means of analyzing the graves of the
stone-lined/cist types as complexes together with the deceased and the
(lack of) inventory within the individual cemeteries and their local
groupings the paper will cautiously attempt to try and tackle various
problems raised by this unquestionably effort-taking care for the
dead: whether any social stratification can be stipulated from them,
whether they represent a general trend or are upheld as a specific
sub-regional feature unifying a group of cemeteries etc.

By contrasting the Northern Bulgarian situation with other regions
with specific political and economic development some preliminary
conclusion will be drawn whether the chronological and territorial
proliferation of this grave type is locally determined: first and
foremost, of course, the geographically and culturally adjacent are of
the Wallachian plain and the Danube Delta hinterland; Thrace
(stressing on rural vs. urban cemeteries); the Rhodope mountain region
(with its peculiar cultural continuation); the Crimea (as a doorstep
and redoubt of the Byzantine oikoumene) etc.
