---
layout: abstract

title: "Out-of-town Necropolises at Province of Thrace and Τheir
        Settlement Attribution (Ιst - IIIrd Centuries A.D.)"

author: "Kaloyan Pramatarov"

institution: "Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”"

keywords: "Principate, Necropolis-Settlement Link, Grave's Social
           Categories, Settlement Pattern"

session_id: "19ma"

timeslot: "09.30 - 10.00"
---

Main goal of the present paper is the representation of the problems
related to the settlement attribution of the out-of-town mound and
flat necropolises from the teritory of Roman Province Thrace during
the Principate (Ιst - IIIrd centuries A.D.). The report gives an
general idea about the historical, socio-political, administrative
and culture factors that had formed the settlement pattern during the
roman period and indicates - by describing the common regularities and
by giving precise examples,- the еxisting link between the different
types of settlement units and the necropolises situated in their
vicinity.

Τhe binding of the mound and flat out-of- town necropolises with units
from the settlement pattern is problematic and rendered difficult for
the lack of explicit criteria in determination of the settlement
units, which provokes their wrong “classification” and
interpretation. The problem is directly related to the scarcity of the
summary studies dedicated to the typology, the structure and the main
characteristics of the villages, fortified settlements and the
non-fortified “half- town” settlements from the period Ist- IIIrd
centuries A.D. Until the 80's of XXth century, in bulgarian
archeological publication of burial complexes from the roman era it's
common the information for their settlement context to be
skipped. Very often the tombstones of flat out-of-town necropolises
are accidental finds with no archeological context, which makes
impossible their attribution toward the settlement pattern. The
fitting together between out-of- town flat and mound necropolises and
the elements from the settlement pattern is additionally embarrassed
by the positioning of the burial complexes between several settlement
units.

The paper gives the available examples for the reciprocal link between
the out-of-town necropolises and different types of settlement units:
1. non-fortified open settlements: the villages of the free, dependent
and “half-dependent” population with agricultural or other means of
livelihood, the non-fortified settlements of militaries (veteranes,
foederates), the civil settlement in the vicinity of military camps
(canabae), the settlement centres of administratively differentiated
rural regions and territories, out-of- town market-places, settlements
related to road stations; 2. fortified settlements: fortress, military
subdivisions (burgi), barracks (praesidia); 3. settlement centres of
private or state medium/big land estates (fundi) which are specialized
in agricultural and artisan's production: vilae rusticae, vilae-
residencies; 4. sanctuaries.  It had been made the distinction between
three main social grave categories – poor graves, “middle category
graves”, and “rich graves” and it had been made a try their relations
to the settlement pattern to be determinated.