---
layout: abstract

title: "Women Jewelry in Aegean Sea at the Archaic Period"

author: "Özge Sayış Tokdemir"

institution: "National and Kapodistrian University of Athens"

keywords: "Jewellery, Women, Archaic, Cyclades"

session_id: "18aa"

timeslot: "14.45 - 15.15"
---

Jewellery is one of the oldest forms of body adornment; recently found
100,000-year-old beads made from Nassarius shells are thought to be
the oldest known jewellery. High-quality jewellery was made with
gemstones and precious metals, such as silver or gold. During the
antiquity, gold was the most often chosen metal. Factors affecting the
selection of materials include cultural differences and the
availability of the materials. Jewellery is meant to adorn nearly
every body part, from hairpins to toe rings and therefore the types of
jewellery are numerous.

My principal aim has been and is to use archaeology to gain a better
understanding of Greek society in the archaic period. My principal
goal however has always been to contribute to an ‘interdisciplinary’
debate, which : concerns the relationship between Archaeology and
History of the ancient world in general and Greece in particular. I
would like to study the world of women in the archaic society, by
research on women's ornaments and jewellery. Therefore the objective
of my PhD research is to investigate the importance of jewellery for
women during the Archaic Period at Cyclades region. In general,
historians and archeologists who studied ancient women jewellery
combined the aspects of technology and production, style, and
iconography in order to gain a whole historical sight of the role of
jewellery in the ancient world. However very few of them explain
symbolism of these jewels to not in any considerable degree.

The methodology will be based on books and articles and
collections. The primary data sources will be books from museum
collections, archeological contexts already published in English and
Turkish literature, articles examining the Cyclades region during the
Archaic Period, personal survey on jewellery collections in Greek
Museum, gathering information from the historical perspective. Most
importantly, gathering list of museums in related region (Cyclades-Crete-Asia Minor), visiting museums and specifying the topic
that I will study on. Visiting and contacting other museums in other
regions, investigate, examine and search jewelries that is specified
subject on my doctoral thesis. A possible approach will be that of
emphasising the subject in respect with the precise region and time
period. To sum up, jewellery becomes timeless and a target for
constant development and refinement. By all means, the logic that
women-used jewellery is discussed on this paper will not include and
give the result only as “ to express” themselves or “ to show” their
status. Any how this idea gives the right impression, for a fact there
must be other causes to put jewellery by ancient women.