---
layout: abstract

title: "Fuzzy Boundaries, Changing Pottery: the Case of Late Neolithic
        Stavroupoli-Thessaloniki"

author: "Teresa Silva"

institution: "Democritus University of Thrace, Komotini"

keywords: "Late Neolithic, Community, Borders, Interaction, Ceramics,
           Style"

session_id: "18mp"

timeslot: "09.30 - 10.00"
---

It is tempting to treat borders as fixed, lines drawn on a map, but to
do so fails to take into account that borders are permeable. They may
be crossed by people, ideas, and objects in a variety of ways as part
of an ever changing social landscape. The challenge is how to discuss
this dynamic nature of a settlement’s boundary through the static
material record. Ceramics, with their high survival rate and stylistic
change offer an opportunity to do so.

Using a diachronic approach, three stages, within the Late Neolithic
period (5700-4800BC), at the site of Stavroupoli-Thessaloniki are
discussed. This model of interpretation is based on part of the
ongoing PhD study of the ceramic material which comes from two
domestic areas which include houses, outdoor food processing areas,
hearths, and rubbish areas. The three stages selected, though all
clearly from the same site and potting tradition, invite different
interpretations of how the community perceived itself and its openness
to the ‘outside’ through a discussion of the variability found within
a site. The focus is upon the so-called tablewares as they are
typically assumed to be part of the daily lives of the inhabitants.

The first stage discussed is that of a generally homogenous
assemblage, mostly black vessels, juxtaposed with visible connections
to the wider networks in the region, specifically that of
incised-encrusted (visibly connecting the site to Cakran, Albania) and
a distinct red-polished import (connecting the site to the more
Northern site of Apsalos, Greece). The second stage presents a far
more varied assemblage which in of itself is a challenge to
interpret. However, by focusing on the details of the variability, one
can see how references to the wider networks (reaching along the
Danube) simultaneously indicates broader networks and closer ties to
other sites (across the Thermaic Gulf) while indicating a fluid nature
of internal dynamics. The third stage shows that a technological shift
may be connected to a closing off of the borders-a stronger focus on
the settlement in of itself.

This model is presented as a way to use style as a tool in the
interpretation of community dynamics, both on an inter-site scale and
an intra-site scale, rather than as a definition of what the pottery
looked like over time.
